[Music]
hello again so Chapter two
now from the beginning of infinity it's
called closer to reality it's a much
shorter chapter and so that's helpful
for me because I don't have as much time
today so we'll read through parts of it
once more and I might make a few
comments along the way it's called
closer to reality because David is
writing about how it is that we come to
understand reality better in other words
come closer to it closer to our
understanding of it through our science
and technology these things even though
they might appear at first glance to put
things between us and that reality
they're the very things that help bring
us closer to the reality and so he makes
a very powerful point about that he
begins by through providing a personal
anecdote and this is where as a graduate
student he's talking about how he was
working with some fellow students and
I'll just read the parts that are
relevant to set the scene he was
observing galaxies through microscopes
and he continues that is how astronomers
used to use the Palomar Sky Survey a
collection of 1874 photographic
negatives on the sky on glass plates
which showed the stars and galaxies as
shapes on a white background and so
David looked at one of these and he
describes how he encountered
difficulties so I continued well he
continues one reason is that it is not
always obvious which are galaxies and
which are merely stars or other
foreground objects some galaxies are
easy to recognize
for instance stars are never spiral or
noticeably elliptical but some shapes
are so faint that it is hard to tell
whether they are sharp some galaxies
appear small faint and circular and some
are partly obscured by other objects
nowadays such measurements are made by
computers using sophisticated pattern
matching algorithms but in those days
one just had to examine each object
carefully and use clues such as how
fuzzy the edges looked though there are
also fuzzy objects such as supernova
remnants in our galaxy one used rules of
thumb how would one test such a rule of
thumb one way is to select a region of
the sky at random and then take a
photograph of it at higher resolution so
that the identification of galaxies is
easier then one compares of those
identifications with the ones made using
the rule of thumb if they differ the
rule is inaccurate if they do not differ
then one cannot be sure one can never be
sure of course so it just paused there
he says one can never be sure of course
now david says this often all fallible
do I often bring it up as well but this
idea of being sure or being certain it's
a remarkably pervasive thing at this
anti fallibilism outsiders and
philosophers as well as religious
dogmatist as well as people who believe
in certain kinds of religious certainty
are subject to this I've written a few
notes about my thoughts on it so lots of
people seem to want complete or final
answers or so people people seem to seek
final answers in a way even even at the
very beginning of the beginning of
infinity David begins chapter 1 with a
quote from John Wheeler made back in
1986 and I'll just read it for you and
he write he writes or John Wheeler said
behind it all is surely an idea so
simple so beautiful that when we grasp
it in a decade a century or a millennium
we will all say to each other how could
it have been otherwise so the we look
I think can be interpreted in one of two
ways either he's seeking a foundation or
or perhaps even some kind of certainty
or on the other hand he's seeking a
fundamental theory and I think he's
seeking a fundamental theory but there's
a misunderstanding
I think at times between what people who
are interested in fundamental ideas are
doing and what people who are interested
in final theories are seeking there's
there's a huge difference a fundamental
theory is a theory that is implicated in
many other theories which lies beneath
many other theories and so it's
fundamental because it's below other
things but it's not necessarily
foundational so I think there is this
difference between fundamental and
foundational or even infallible but some
people might get the sense in that quote
that there's something anti fallible is
going on the behind it all and so we get
to a final theory that is so simple now
I think that would be a
misinterpretation but I can understand
how someone might read it that way
whatever the case there is a pervasive
meme out there that what we are seeking
in science our final answers it still
exists it's in the vernacular I think I
think it might come from religion and if
this is pure speculation and I think
that that might come from evolution what
I mean is that parents have almost
always and till very recently perhaps
taught children in this way of don't do
it I'm certain are you sure I said no
you must do this you have to do this
there is no option so parents tend to
speak in these infallible 'lest ways
these authoritarian fallibilist ways
it's kind of ingrained in the culture I
think that
what might have come first and it's a
useful first guess for our ancestors who
probably got it from evolution this idea
that you simply need to do what you're
told because what I've done worked and
so what I did is going to work for you
it's the only thing I do know so
therefore you better do it all you'll
die something like that and so if this
worked for adults the children better
than simply allowing children's to do
absolutely anything they want in other
words rediscovering the entire world
themselves without any help which is
really the function of parents to help
children to understand the world to
navigate in ways through the world the
children themselves would appreciate and
and and find fun doing but before you
can have that kind of more nuanced view
about children the the precursor is do
as you're told so children are taught
sometimes I think by this anti
fallibilism idea it's ingrained I think
it came first I think it probably came
from evolution adults then spoken in
fellow boss ways to each other because
that's the way they were taught his
children had that evolved probably into
some kind of moral laws and about a I
need for certainty and possibly out of
this a metaphysics arose that again was
founded on some kind of certainty that
the gods absolutely existed and they you
had to believe in them because they're
definitely there and so culture is
saturated with this and in history has
been as well political movements have
been and the key is these things are not
extinct because although some of us
realize that root there's this poisonous
common core to all of this it doesn't
mean that everyone is going to be a
fallibilist the default position appears
to be in culture now to be anti fallible
us to believe in certainties to believe
we can get to some final
answer that will be unchanging and it
doesn't matter if you are a respected
scientist or a philosopher or a
rationalist it's quite possible to
nevertheless be saturated in anti
fallibilism in yet and people are the
people are revealed by the ways in which
they speak as to whether or not they
fundamentally endorse this idea that you
can reach final answers in science you
can have complete answers let's continue
with the beginning of infinity and where
David is talking about looking at
galaxies through a microscope because
they're on photographic plates which is
the way it used to be done he says I was
wrong to be impressed by the Me's scale
of what I was looking at some people
become depressed at the scale of the
universe because it makes them feel
insignificant other people are relieved
to feel insignificant which is even
worse but in any case those are mistakes
feeling insignificant because the
universe is large has exactly the same
logic is feeling inadequate for not
being a cow or a herd of cows the
universe is not there to overwhelm us is
our home and our resource the bigger the
better
again here's one of those ways in which
david provides a subtle introduction or
preview for things to come and this is a
powerful point and it's one of the ones
that is most swiftly rejected in my
experience when I encounter these ideas
this idea that the universe is their
home if we take that seriously that it's
not merely our own residence or even our
planet even our solar system but the
universe is our home it contains our
resources it is a hostile environment
but home nonetheless it's not out to
kill us but it's also not out to sustain
us we and the knowledge that we produce
is the thing that enables us to control
the implacably vast and hostile universe
and so we need to work with the universe
it's not against us but it's not going
to go out of its way to help us either
it's not a thinking thing and he says
the bigger the bed
as far as we know it seems as though the
physical universe is infinite
he continues but then there is the
philosophical magnitude of a cluster of
galaxies as I moved the crosshairs to
one nondescript galaxy after another
checking at what I guess to be the
center of each some whimsical thoughts
occurred to me I wondered whether I
would be the first and last human being
ever to pay conscious attention to a
particular galaxy I was looking at the
blurry object for only a few seconds yet
it might be laden with meaning for all I
knew ok so this is where I'll try and
summarize the remainder of what he says
there but I would urge everyone to read
it because his summary is far more
eloquent and sorry his actual words are
going to be far more eloquent than my
summary but essentially he says that
this this process is error-prone in a
sort of humorous way because as a
non-expert looking at these galaxies
he's prone to the kind of errors that
someone who is prone more frequently to
the kind of errors that someone who is
expert in this might not be and so as
he's thinking about whether or not a
particular galaxy that he was looking at
is one that no person on earth will ever
look at again nor has it ever looked at
he thinks perhaps there are planets
orbiting stars in that galaxy that he's
looking at and on those planets are
civilizations and those civilizations
have long histories and culture and he's
thinking all this and he's mind is kind
of expanding to the realization that
there could be so much meaning embedded
in that picture in that image that that
well at least embedded philosophically
in that image that what is behind those
pixels on that photographic plate what
is behind those little smudges on the
photographic plate is a huge amount of
meaning
what he does actually say he's he he
asked the person but he was he was work
he asked the person he was working with
he says is that a galaxy or a star
neither was the reply that is just a
defect in the photographic emulsion the
drastic mental gear change made me laugh
my grandiose speculations about the deep
meaning of what I was seeing had turned
out to be in regard to this particular
object nothing at all suddenly there
were no people in that that image there
were there was no culture there was no
history and it all just vanished really
quickly so he made a mistake then he
goes on to say but wait was I ever
looking at a galaxy all the other blobs
were in fact microscopic smudges of
silver - if I misclassified the cause of
all of them because it looked too much
like the others why was that such a big
error he says because an error in
experimental science is a mistake about
the cause of something like an accurate
observation it is a matter of theory
very little in nature is detectable by
unaided human sensors most of what
happens is too fast or too slow too big
or too small too remote or too hidden
behind our Paik barriers or operate on
principles - different from anything
that influenced our evolution but in
some cases we can arrange for such
phenomena to become perceptible via
scientific instruments we experience
such instruments as bringing us closer
to reality just as I felt while looking
at that galactic cluster but in purely
physical terms they only ever separate
us further from it I could have looked
up at the night sky in the direction of
that cluster and there would have been
nothing between it in my eye but a few
grams of air but I would have seen
nothing at all I could have interposed a
telescope and I might have seen it in
the event I was interposing a telescope
a camera a photographic development
laboratory another camera to make copies
of the blades a truck to bring the
plates to my University and a microscope
I could see the cluster far better with
all that equipment in the way
this is profound this idea that the
technology that human beings have
created because of our scientific
knowledge then is the very thing which
allows us to get closer to reality but
in a sense it puts physical barriers
between us and that reality but the
reason that we do that is in order to
help us correct their errors to
constrain what we know I had a similar
experience when I although I i studied
astronomy at university I didn't tend to
look through telescopes very often at
all what I did do was use computers so
we had the Swinburne University
supercomputer which is basically just a
whole bunch of normal computers but all
working in parallel together a roomful
of normal computers working in parallel
they call it sleeping up you know and
what we used to do were were galaxy
simulations we used to collide galaxies
together and in particular I looked at
one called up to 71 and this was a pair
of spiral galaxies that he's in the
process of colliding of course all you
see all that is sing by astronomers when
I look through telescopes at a galaxy
like that is a static picture the motion
of the stars let alone the two galaxies
is occurring on scales of millions and
hundreds of millions of years it is
reasonable to presume that no one alive
today is going to see much in the way of
motion of those two galaxies in reality
we do not see them moving but we know
they are at least we do not see them
moving with our naked eye we know they
are because we can detect when we look
more closely the redshift of the stars
the the the the spectra of stars reveals
the direction in which parts of those
galaxies are moving and so we can see
that they're actually moving together we
can also determine by the same methods
how massive the galaxies are
because with spiral galaxies' they are
literally spinning and the faster
they're spinning the more massive the
galaxies are so you can have an estimate
for the mass of the galaxies so you can
find an estimate for the velocity and
you can find an estimate for the mass
then what you can do is you can put some
of this data into a supercomputer and
then what you can do is you can try to
guess what's going to happen next to the
two galaxies during the collision and
after the collision will they merge
together will they pass through one
another it's actually possible for
spiral galaxies that collide to pass
through one another not unaffected but
they will pass through and keep going
they're kind of like clouds it's very
unusual highly unlikely for stars
themselves to collide even though the
galaxies have because there's so much
empty space in between the stars and so
we will never see this galaxy pair
actually colliding we will never see by
which I mean able to observe the
consequences of the predictions that we
make unless we're still around in a long
time had some hundreds of millions of
years what I predicted would happen is
that they would indeed combine into one
single galaxy but that's based on the
output of a supercomputer and it's based
on a very low resolution prediction by
which I mean not only do we make
assumptions which are very error-prone
about the masses of these two galaxies
and the velocities of these two galaxies
we cannot possibly with our current
technology with our super computer
technology simulate the collision of two
bodies each of which contains some
hundreds of billions of stars if you
want to find out what happens when a
couple of hundred objects over here
combined with a couple of hundred
objects over there this is the famous
n-body problem and that
it becomes intractable it's very
difficult to try and figure out what all
those particles are doing in response to
each other so what you do is instead of
assuming that you've got some hundreds
of billions here and some hundreds of
billions here you can just use some
millions here and some millions here and
so you've only got some very very tiny
fraction of the actual number of objects
here in here and then assuming that when
they collide it is similar to what
happens when you've actually got the
hundreds of billions whether or not
that's true will be sorted out in years
to come as the computers get more
powerful and we can see whether or not
we're converging on the same answer but
all this is to say that all of this
technology supercomputers in the
software that runs on them and the
observations that we make using
telescopes enable us to see into the
distant future it's a blurry image but
it's better than a random guess and the
better our technology becomes the more
resolution we have about the future
about predicting the future and this is
a this is a genuine kind of prediction
fond of talking about prophecies where
people have really unconstrained ideas
about the function of knowledge but
unless we have a particular interest
though some people have a particular
interest somewhere in doing something
with up to 71 I think it's fair to say
that given the sheer number of galaxies
and stars in the universe
it'll be some hundreds of millions of
years before anyone's interested in
going to up to seven life trying to UM I
don't know use the resources there okay
so that was a a long diversion let me go
back to the beginning of an infinity
okay and I'll just I'm jumping around a
little bit here but this is another
interesting part a few a few pages back
where he says the computers nowadays do
the Catalonia of galaxies rather than
having graduate students look at
photographic plates and he says the
computers that nowadays catalog galaxies
may or may not do it better than the
graduate students used to but they
certainly did not experience such
reflections as David had as a result I
mentioned this because I often hear
scientific research described in a
rather bleak way suggesting that it is a
mostly mindless toil the inventor Thomas
Edison once said none of my inventions
came by accident I see a worthwhile need
to be met and I make trial after trial
until it comes what it boils down to is
1% inspiration and 99% perspiration some
people say the same about theoretical
research where the perspiration phase is
supposedly uncreated intellectual work
such as doing algebra or translating
algorithms into computer programs but
the fact that a computer or robot can
perform a task mindlessly does not imply
that is a mindless task when scientists
to it after all computers play chess
mindlessly by exhaustively searching the
consequences of all possible moves but
humans had shave a similar-looking
functionality in a completely different
way by creative and enjoyable thought
perhaps those galaxies catalogue in
computer programs were written by those
same graduates those same graduate
students distilling what they had
learned into reproducible algorithms
which means that they must have learned
something while performing a task that a
computer performs without learning
anything but more profoundly I expect
that Edison was misinterpreting his own
experience a trial that fails is still
fun a repetitive experiment is not
repetitive if one is thinking about the
ideas that it is testing in the reality
that is investigating that Galaxy
project was intended to discover with a
dark matter see the next chapter really
exists and it succeeded if Edison or
those graduate students or any
scientific researcher engaged upon the
perspiration phase of discovery had
really been doing it mindlessly they
would be missing most of the fun which
is also what largely powers that 1%
inspiration so this is important and
this is a theme that we will come back
to that what people are has different to
any other entity in the universe that we
know of we are creative
and so even if we're going through a an
uncreated perspiration phase apparently
we're doing something very different
than if an alternate or automated
machine was taking that task for us we
were able to think about each of the
steps we're able to think about other
things while we're doing it
and so we are necessarily creative at
all points so now what's the purpose of
scientific instruments I preface this at
the beginning of the video so let me
return to the text now the primary
function of the telescope's optics is to
reduce the illusion that the stars are
few faint twinkling and moving the same
is true of every feature of the
telescope and of all other scientific
instruments each layer of indirectness
through its associated theory corrects
errors illusions misleading perspectives
and gaps perhaps it is the mistaken
imperialist idea of pure theory free
observation that makes it seem odd that
truly accurate observation is always so
hugely indirect but the fact is the
progress requires the application of
even more knowledge in advance of our
observations and so he says even though
he was mistaken in one case when he was
looking at one of the smudges on the
photographic plates misinterpreting that
smudge as a galaxy when it just turned
out to be a fingerprint that concern
that the rest of the images that he was
looking at were similarly just as much
as or weren't galaxies for some other
reason can't be true because the point
is that our knowledge and our technology
corrects errors like that he didn't have
the knowledge of that particular point
but the other expert did and so he says
so I was indeed looking at galaxies
observing a galaxy via specks of silver
is no different in that regard from
observing a garden buyer via images on
the retina okay so I'm going to the
conclusion now there's a fast chapter
so it's a good juggler and so he
continues explanatory theories tell us
how to build and operate instruments in
exactly the right way to work this
miracle like conjuring tricks in Reverse
such instruments fool our senses into
seeing what is really there our minds
through the methodological criterion
that I mentioned in Chapter one conclude
that a particular thing is real if and
only if it figures in our best
explanation of something physically all
that has happened is that human beings
on earth have dug up raw materials such
as iron ore and sand and have rearranged
them still on earth into complex objects
such as radio telescopes computers and
display screens and now instead of
looking at the sky they look at those
objects they're focusing their eyes on
human artifacts
that are close enough to touch but their
minds are focused on alien entities and
processes light-years away sometimes
they are looking at glowing dots just as
their ancestors did but on computer
monitors instead of the sky sometimes
they are looking at numbers or graphs
but in all cases they are inspecting
local phenomena pixels on a screen ink
on paper and so on these things are
physically very unlike stars they are
much smaller they are not dominated by
nuclear forces and gravity they are not
capable of transmute ating elements or
creating life they have not been there
for billions of years
but when astronomers look at them they
see stars so this is profound and this
is the idea that we do not experience
reality directly and even if we were to
take away all of that instrumentation
and technology and we were to lay on our
backs and look up the night sky and see
a star what's actually going on as David
mentioned in his TED talk and I think he
talks about this in Chapter one I didn't
mention it is light photons are striking
the back of the retina eventually once
they get through the cornea and causing
electrical signals to be sent to via the
optic nerve back to the brain and in the
brain some neurons are crackling away
they're communicating with one another
and that's what we are okay so we we are
a mine
and that's inside of that brain and
however the mind works it depends at
least in part for now on how the neurons
transmit electricity to one another
that's what we are
everything else is interpretation our
brain has to interpret the signals
coming from the optic nerve the optic
nerve is only sending signals because
light has been detected at the retina
and that light has only been detected to
retina because it's somehow made it
twice through the atmosphere from the
star so this process of seeing stars or
seeing anything is an extremely complex
phenomena where there are many layers of
interpretation between your mind and the
reality out there so that's chapter two
I'm not sure when I'll get to Chapter
three
we'll see it could be some weeks but
this has kind of been fun see